Update lab4 (#391)
puzzle/prometheus-training: content/en/docs/04/labs/42-k8s.md

---
title: "4.2 Tasks: Pushgateway"
weight: 2
sectionnumber: 4.2
onlyWhen: baloise
---

### Task {{% param sectionnumber %}}.2 - Push metrics to Pushgateway

> In this task you're now going to push metrics to the pushgateway. This is what you would normally do, after a cronjob has completed successfully.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this task you're going to push metrics to the Pushgateway. This is what you would normally do, after a cronjob has completed successfully.
```

> Documentation on how the pushgateway is implemented at Baloise can be found here: https://confluence.baloisenet.com/atlassian/display/BALMATE/07+-+Push+metrics+to+your+Prometheus+instance

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Documentation on how the Pushgateway is implemented at Baloise can be found here: [07 - Push metrics to your Prometheus instance](https://confluence.baloisenet.com/atlassian/display/BALMATE/07+-+Push+metrics+to+your+Prometheus+instance).
```

> Documentation on how the pushgateway is implemented at Baloise can be found here: https://confluence.baloisenet.com/atlassian/display/BALMATE/07+-+Push+metrics+to+your+Prometheus+instance

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Documentation on how the Pushgateway is implemented at Baloise can be found here: [07 - Push metrics to your Prometheus instance](https://confluence.baloisenet.com/atlassian/display/BALMATE/07+-+Push+metrics+to+your+Prometheus+instance)
```

> In order to [push](https://github.com/prometheus/pushgateway/blob/master/README.md#command-line) metrics to the Pushgateway, you can simple send a HTTP `POST` or `PUT` request, with the actual metric we want to push as content, to it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to [push](https://github.com/prometheus/pushgateway/blob/master/README.md#command-line) metrics to the Pushgateway, you can simply send an HTTP `POST` or `PUT` request, with the actual metric we want to push as content.
```

> When pushing metrics to the Pushgateway you always have to specify the job, therefore the URL Path looks like this

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When pushing metrics to the Pushgateway, you always have to specify the job, therefore the URL Path looks like this:
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

```bash
http://localhost:9091/metrics/job/<JOB_NAME>{/<LABEL_NAME>/<LABEL_VALUE>}
```

> If for example we want to push the `prometheus_training_labs_completed_total` metric with the value `4` on the job `prometheus_training`, we can do that by executing the following command.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If we want to push the `prometheus_training_labs_completed_total` metric with the value `4` on the job `prometheus_training`, we can do that by executing the following command:
```

Get your specific Pushgateway URL

FIXME: team replacer

```bash
team=
oc -n $team-monitoring  get cm pushgateway-url -ojsonpath='{.data.PUSHGATEWAY_URL}'
```

> Create a Kubernetes job that pushes the specified metric to the push gateway. Make sure to replace the pushgateway with the url received above.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create a Kubernetes job that pushes the specified metric to the Pushgateway. Make sure to replace the Pushgateway with the URL received above.
```

If you are not very familiar with `oc create job`. The above command does the following:

* `oc -n ... create job` creates an adhoc [kubernetes job](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/controllers/job/)
* `--image=` specifies, which image the container will use. We will use the toolkit container because it provides bash and curl.
* `pushgw-example1` is the name of the job
* `bash -c "..."` is the command, the job should execute

{{% /alert %}}

FIXME web UI
Verify the metric in the [Prometheus we UI](http://LOCALHOST:9090/graph?g0.range_input=1h&g0.expr=prometheus_training_labs_completed_total&g0.tab=1). It may take up to 30s ( Depending on the `scrape_interval`) to be available in Prometheus.

[Push](https://github.com/prometheus/pushgateway/blob/master/README.md#command-line) the following metric (notice the `instance` label) to the Pushgateway and make sure the metric gets scraped by Prometheus

```promql
# TYPE some_metric_total counter
# HELP This is just an example metric.
some_metric_total{job="prometheus_training",instance="myinstance"} 42
```

{{% details title="Hints" mode-switcher="normalexpertmode" %}}

> To push a metric to the Pushgateway, which then will be scraped by Prometheus, we can simply create the following job. Note the actual content of the HTTP request, is just simply the exact metric we want Prometheus to scrape.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To push a metric to the Pushgateway, which will then be scraped by Prometheus, we can simply create the following job. Note the actual content of the HTTP request, is exactly the metric we want Prometheus to scrape.
```

> Execute the following command to push the metric to your Pushgateway

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Execute the following command to push the metric to your Pushgateway:
```

```bash
oc -n $team-monitoring create job --image=quay.balgroupit.com/library/toolkit:ubuntu-20.04 pushgw-example2 -- \
bash -c "cat <<EOF | curl --data-binary @- http://pushgateway.[examples]-monitoring:9091/metrics/job/prometheus_training/instance/myinstance
# TYPE some_metric_total counter
# HELP This is just an example metric.
some_metric_total 42
EOF"
```

{{% alert title="Command Explanation" color="primary" %}}

> If you are not very familiar with the Linux shell. The above command does the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you are not very familiar with the Linux shell, the above command does the following:
```

* the `cat` command reads the actual metric and pipes it to `stdin`

> * curl sends a HTTP POST request to the url <http://localhost:9091/metrics/job/prometheus_training/instance/myinstance> with the --data-binary parameter set to `stdin` (the actual metric)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* curl sends a HTTP POST request to the URL <http://localhost:9091/metrics/job/prometheus_training/instance/myinstance> with the --data-binary parameter set to `stdin` (the actual metric)
```

{{% /alert %}}

FIXME web UI

> Verify the metric in the [Prometheus we UI](http://LOCALHOST:9090/graph?g0.range_input=1h&g0.expr=some_metric_total&g0.tab=1). It may take up to 30s ( Depending on the `scrape_interval`) to be available in Prometheus.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Verify the metric in the [Prometheus we UI](http://LOCALHOST:9090/graph?g0.range_input=1h&g0.expr=some_metric_total&g0.tab=1). It may take up to 30s (depending on the `scrape_interval`) to be available in Prometheus.
```

{{% /alert %}}

According to the [official Pushgateway documentation](https://github.com/prometheus/pushgateway/blob/master/README.md#command-line) you can delete either metrics for specific label combinations (exact match required) or all metrics.

Delete the pushed metrics from the Pushgateway.

{{% details title="Hints" mode-switcher="normalexpertmode" %}}

To delete the metrics for the job `prometheus_training`, you can simply execute the following command:

```bash
oc -n $team-monitoring create job --image=quay.balgroupit.com/library/toolkit:ubuntu-20.04 pushgw-delete -- \
curl -X DELETE http://pushgateway.[examples]-monitoring:9091/metrics/job/prometheus_training
```

{{% alert title="Note" color="primary" %}}
This will delete metrics with the label set `{job="prometheus_training"}` but not `{job="prometheus_training",another_label="value"}` since the delete methode requires an exact label match.
{{% /alert %}}

> The Pushgateway pod has no persistence, so you can delete all metrics stored in Pushgateway by deleting the pod

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Pushgateway pod has no persistence, so you can delete all metrics stored in Pushgateway by deleting the pod.
```
